An image may be defined as a two-dimensional function, f(x,y), where x and y are
spatial (plane) coordinates, and the amplitude of f at any pair of coordinates (x,y)
is called the intensity or gray level of the image at that point. When x, y, and the
intensity values of f are all finite, discrete quantities, we call the image a digital image.
The field of digital image processing refers to processing digital images by means of
a digital computer. Note that a digital image is composed of a finite number of elements,
each of which has a particular location and value. These elements are called
picture elements, image elements, pels, and pixels. Pixel is the term used most widely
to denote the elements of a digital image. We will consider these definitions in more
formal terms in Chapter 2.
Vision is the most advanced of our senses, so it is not surprising that images
play the single most important role in human perception. However, unlike humans,
who are limited to the visual band of the electromagnetic (EM) spectrum, imaging
machines cover almost the entire EM spectrum, ranging from gamma to radio waves.
They can operate on images generated by sources that humans are not accustomed
to associating with images. These include ultrasound, electron microscopy, and computer-generated images.
Thus, digital image processing encompasses a wide and varied field of applications.
There is no general agreement among authors regarding where image processing stops 
and other related areas, such as image analysis and computer vision, start.
Sometimes, a distinction is made by defining image processing as a discipline in
which both the input and output of a process are images. We believe this to be a
limiting and somewhat artificial boundary. For example, under this definition, even
the trivial task of computing the average intensity of an image (which yields a single number) 
would not be considered an image processing operation. On the other hand,
there are fields such as computer vision whose ultimate goal is to use computers 
to emulate human vision, including learning and being able to make inferences
and take actions based on visual inputs. This area itself is a branch of artificial 
intelligence (AI) whose objective is to emulate human intelligence. The field of AI is in its
earliest stages of infancy in terms of development, with progress having been much
slower than originally anticipated. The area of image analysis (also called image
understanding) is in between image processing and computer vision.
There are no clear-cut boundaries in the continuum from image processing at
one end to computer vision at the other. However, one useful paradigm is to consider 
three types of computerized processes in this continuum: low-, mid-, and high-level 
processes. Low-level processes involve primitive operations such as image
preprocessing to reduce noise, contrast enhancement, and image sharpening. 
A low-level process is characterized by the fact that both its inputs and outputs are images.
Mid-level processing of images involves tasks such as segmentation (partitioning
an image into regions or objects), description of those objects to reduce them to a
form suitable for computer processing, and classification (recognition) of individual
objects. A mid-level process is characterized by the fact that its inputs generally
are images, but its outputs are attributes extracted from those images (e.g., edges,
contours, and the identity of individual objects). Finally, higher-level processing
involves “making sense” of an ensemble of recognized objects, as in image analysis,
and, at the far end of the continuum, performing the cognitive functions normally
associated with human vision.
Based on the preceding comments, we see that a logical place of overlap between
image processing and image analysis is the area of recognition of individual regions
or objects in an image. Thus, what we call in this book digital image processing 
encompasses processes whose inputs and outputs are images and, in addition, includes 
processes that extract attributes from images up to, and including, the recognition of
individual objects. As an illustration to clarify these concepts, consider the area of
automated analysis of text. The processes of acquiring an image of the area 
containing the text, preprocessing that image, extracting (segmenting) the individual
characters, describing the characters in a form suitable for computer processing, and
recognizing those individual characters are in the scope of what we call digital image
processing in this book. Making sense of the content of the page may be viewed as
being in the domain of image analysis and even computer vision, depending on the
level of complexity implied by the statement “making sense of.” As will become
evident shortly, digital image processing, as we have defined it, is used routinely in a
broad range of areas of exceptional social and economic value. The concepts developed 
in the following chapters are the foundation for the methods used in those application areas.